Me, Dr.
Nathan McCluskey.
Okay. Are they through? But just on audio only.
Thank you. So you're
not picking up the cues?
Yeah. Okay.
What if he's hearing this? He's not there.
Is, is there anyone else on standby?
Um, Chris Chamberlain? Yes. Okay.
Well, let's go to Chris. Okay.
So Chris is here, huh? Yeah, Chris is online.
Oh, Chris is online. Okay. Chris.
Hello. I'm just turning things on.
I've been allowed in the door.
My name's Chris. Can you hear me?
Yeah. No, thank you. Um, just our first submitter, uh, has
yet to appear online, so thank you for being nice and early.
You've got five minutes, so we're in your hands.
Okay. Thank you, chair. My name is Chris Chamberlain.
I'm an IT professional, a New Zealand citizen.
I'm not a lawyer, not a planner, not a developer.
And I do, I have no financial interest
or stake in this bill.
I became interested in the bill
because the IFF mechanism itself seems
novel, uh, and new.
I wanted to understand what it actually does
and how this bill changes the original 2020 act.
Um, you should have a written submission from me entitled
Chris Chamberlain Submission Briefing.
It's 21 pages. Sorry about that.
But, um, it's a result of a detailed clause
by clause analysis of the bill against the 2020 Act.
Quite a, um, we've
Got something to Circulate.
Challenging process actually
That's there.
It does not argue a for or against the bill.
What it tries to do is identify with changes
or in fact, the original 2020 Act would produce effects
that undermine the mechanisms long-term value
to New Zealanders effects that might not be visible
until a project is already underway
or until the first community dispute lands in court.
It considers impacts on all of the main stakeholders,
the developers, councils, levy, payers, investors,
water organizations, Maori landowners.
My intent was to be as comprehensive, uh,
and not be advocating for any one group.
I would like to talk to the document structure just
to help people, um, understand it.
There are three main parts.
Um, the first part is the intro
and I discuss the methodology.
You'll see that I've used, um, LLM
or artificial intelligence support
to assist me in this analysis.
I'm happy to talk about that in more detail later.
Um, and there are two key findings tables
on pages five and seven,
which I think are a useful quick reference.
They map every substantive change that the bill makes side
by side with the 2020 Act across all the stakeholder groups.
On pages eight
and nine, I've highlighted something I've called the
stacking problem, where multiple special purpose vehicles
can independently levy the same properties
with no cumulative oversight.
I think this particular issue is very likely
to damage the bill's credibility
and durability if it isn't addressed.
The second, the,
the third section really is pages 11 through 18.
These are the proposals.
Um, they're one or two pages each. They're quite succinct.
They described the problem that I was able to identify
and provide some recommendations for fixing that.
But each one is aimed at staying within the bill's intent
rather than trying to undermine or reverse it.
Um, I mean, there are good sides to this bill
and there are also risks.
And I said, I think that is what I'm trying
to highlight with this work.
For an overall summary, please see the conclusion
on page 21.
Um, there are a number of, of proposals there.
Um, I would like to highlight
what I think are the most important.
Firstly, the, the cumulative levy cap, which is the first
of them on page 11.
This specifically addresses the stacking risk
and the durability, therefore, of this whole mechanism.
Um, the next one
that I think is pretty important is
structured notifications.
Um, the problem, one of the problems with this
legislation as it takes away all of the checks
and balances that were in the original 2020 Act.
So this structured notification process provides a time
bound process with a very tight timeframe, which gives,
and yet it also gives people the opportunity to contribute
and understand what's going on.
The levy commissioner, the Levy Register, these are just
necessary things for running
a mechanism like this and very important.
And finally, the public
and your reports from SPVs,
providing transparency and accountability.
Those would be my top four. Okay.
I snuck one and five of the proposals I have there.
Um, happy to answer questions now. Thank
You. Okay, thank you Mr.
Chamberlain.
Any questions or comments? Uh, Dan Bidar,
Um, I've just noticed there, Chris,
your submission hasn't quite been the,
the full document has been tabled.
Um, you've got, your only submission is half a paragraph
and it, I, i
supplementary Should a refresh it, Dan?
He's just added. Oh, okay. Oh, you've just added, okay.
Sorry there Chris. Um, thank you.
We'll take a look at your written submission. Thank you.
Okay. Anyone else? I Would've, um, liked
to have shared it and just skimmed through it as I did it,
but I don't think you support that, um, screen sharing.
But I appreciate you probably seeing it for the first time.
But I'd just like to under underpin
that there's a fairly exhaustive process
that is reproducible and I'd be happy to talk about that.
To produce a piece of work like this.
We only go up to 11. Yeah. Reload the whole thing.
Okay. Mr. Chamberlain, thank you, uh, for appearing.
Thank you for your submission. It's well
and truly locked into our system now,
so we've got it in its full entirety, so thank you.
Okay. Thank you. Okay. Thank you. Right.
Did we have Dr. Nathan, uh, McCluskey?
Was he able to come through?
Still got question.
Anyone else in the queue? Camera partners,
Anything?
It doesn't really work on. Okay.
Just see if you can message them and if we do an audio
or something if we've got time or if they want, yeah,
I'm not sure what said they seem to.
Okay. How about Cameron Partners, camera partner?
Not online. Anyone else online? No.
Okay.
Okay. Well should we just suspend the meeting until we, um,
get someone back online and we can just
quietly do our work here?
Yeah. Didn't even have to walk out. We'll be back soon.
We'll, trying to tell you, we
didn't even have to walk out for you.
Well, I know we're trying to tell that control.
I know we're struggling. Submitters. Can't even blame us.
Steering group. You've got 10 minutes.
Thanks for coming in early 'cause we've had a 10 minute, um,
submitter fall over, metaphorically.
Um, so we're in your hands,
Right? Uh, thank
you very much for the opportunity
to come and talk to you today.
Appreciate your time. Uh, I'm Scott Nicklin.
I'm the interim CE with, uh, local government New Zealand.
Uh, to my right I've got Mark Butcher, the Chief executive
of the local Government funding Agency, uh,
and Hugo Ellis from Cameron
and Partners who are our lead advisor in the development
of the rate payer assistance scheme.
Um, we obviously have submitted on the, uh, IFF
and we're just here today to talk to you about
how the RAs can support the IFF, um, the RAs,
the Rate Power Assistance scheme.
Uh, we've been in development stages
for about four or five years now.
We completed the deep dive business case late last year.
Uh, that's now currently sitting with the minister
and we believe the rate power assistance scheme will provide
significant support to rate payers, obviously
who say taxpayers, uh, but also to councils.
And we also think there are some synergies with the,
um, IFF as well.
And so keen just to talk to you about that briefly.
Probably take about five minutes to make some introductory
comments and then obviously open it
up for, uh, for questions.
Um, we have broad support across the sector
for the rate power assistance scheme.
So we've had about, um,
eight funding councils help development, uh, to date.
Uh, and we've spoken to roughly about 20 councils, uh,
to get broader support.
So there is broad support across, uh,
the local government sector
for the rate power assistance scheme.
Uh, and as I said, it's currently with the minister
and we are working with officials, uh, to provide advice on,
on going forward and hopefully, uh,
effectively setting up the, uh,
eight power assistance scheme.
Um, so the RAs, uh, can materially enhance the efficiency
and applicability of IFF projects.
Um, the RAs has been developed to address a number
of council issues.
So things like race postponement, um,
deferred development contributions
and property improvement loans that have a public benefit,
for example, solar power.
Uh, and there's other number of other, uh, categories
that we could talk to as well.
And in principle it can also be applied to IFF projects.
Um, there is fundamentally the same
as an IFF responsible SPV.
Um, it raises finance from the debt markets
and is off balance sheet.
Uh, it uses the finance to keep councils whole
by covering their charges and supporting them
to make capital investments.
Um, it also levies rate payers to get repaid as well.
Um, equally in much the same way
as the local government funding agency finances councils.
Um, the RES could
and principle be centralized finance vehicle
for the IFF responsible, um, SPVs, uh,
where the RAs can add value is that it is an established
or what would be an established national organization.
So effectively a shared service for the sector, um,
with the structure systems, processes
and personnel, uh, in place to raise debt, make payments
and invoice rate payers efficiently and effectively.
Um, it will have the statutory powers, uh, enabling it
to charge a levy that is persu, uh,
with local government rate charges.
Um, very much the same as an IFF responsible SPV
because of its structure, purpose living powers
and councils joined in several guarantee it will
have a very high credit rating.
Um, and it's able to obtain very low cost financing
and pass that benefit on to rate payers
because it will issue homogenous securities.
It will be able to develop a wide
and deep debt investor base, um, enhancing margins
and security of access to debt markets.
The RAs will be a low cost operation
and achieve scale across all of its products,
maximizing revenue and cost synergies.
Um, its specialist IT systems
and obviously the relationships that councils have, uh,
with rate payers will enable it to charge a levy
to individual property owners across New Zealand.
Avoiding administrative issues for local authorities,
which may not have the systems in place
to easily leave levy specific rate payers.
In summary, lower establishment costs,
lower financing rates,
and existing invoicing systems
of the RAs would significantly enhance the applicability IFF
to smaller projects and more local authorities
and specific subsets of local authority rate payer basis.
In addition, in the greenhouse housing context, the RES
and the divert dcs under the rate payer assistance schemes
are likely to be able to, um, likely
to be a simpler lower cost mechanism for developers
to access, um, development, contribution financing.
So thank you for your time.
I'm happy to open up for questions.
Any, any other, uh, introductory comments from?
Okay, we're gonna go to, um, Ryan Hamilton. Thanks chair.
Uh, thanks for your submission.
Um, can't help but ask you probably don't remember me, mark,
but I do any, any connection to our GFA
through this or is this Yes.
Yeah. So that would be the lending Body,
Correct. So
our GFA, um, first off has been the best example
of central and local government
corporation, I think in history.
Um, as to where we've got to our GFA is using this as a,
as an example, I suppose,
of paying it forward to the sector.
So what our GFA is going to do is
that we will end up becoming a shareholder.
Uh, we will end up becoming a lender to the RAAs, uh,
for the initial time period when,
until the RAAs gets up to scale.
Uh, and thirdly, uh, our GFA
will be the administrator.
So we will basically de-risk, uh,
the initial startup period.
So we'll provide treasury systems,
we'll provide the finance, the reporting,
the investor relations.
So until Raz gets to the scale
where it can get up on its own feet, uh,
LGFA is basically behind it. Um, a hundred percent.
Okay. And, um,
you mentioned in your submission here further amendments
to approve the IFF Act, but
unless I've missed them, I don't
see what those amendments are.
So what would you recommend in terms of enhancing this?
'cause obviously it's been moth board
essentially for five years.
It's been hard to get off the ground
for councils and developers.
So what, what are the, what are the gaps
that you think we need to add while we're at this stage?
Uh, in terms of the, um, the act that legislation required?
Mm-hmm. So one of the key aspects of the RAAs is
that it has the, or would've be intended to have the ability
to levy rate payers directly.
So that would require, you know, legislative, um, uh,
sort of approval to do that.
So there's a number of sort of features, um,
that the RAAs requires
that we would need legislatively passed for.
Couldn't you just be registered as an SPV, like,
like the IF FS talks about?
Or, um, the, the RES has a bunch of other products.
So rates, postponement, deferred
development contributions, and impact loans.
So it has additional products over
and above, um, you know, potentially providing financing
to I-I-F-F-S PVS as well.
Okay. Um, and with your indulgence chair, I mean,
I don't know what you've submitted here,
but I'd encourage you to, um,
perhaps draft some legislative tweaks now
'cause now's the opportunity to get this right.
My second question, observation is, um, I'm,
I was surprised we've had more councils engage in this
process 'cause this is a huge potentially game changer
for infrastructure funding and financing.
Why do you think they haven't engaged
or do you think they're still,
is it just too mature in New Zealand context as to why?
Uh, in terms of engaging in the development
of the right power assistance scheme?
No, the IFF generally? Yeah.
Probably, probably for my, yeah. Um, response.
So, um, I think part of it is, so look, um,
councils, uh, slowly adopt things.
Um, so we started off at LGFA with, um, 18 councils,
and now we've got 77 outta 78, um, councils.
Uh, it took us 10 years to get, Dunedin was the last one.
Chatham Islands is young, is not, uh,
it ta takes a little bit of time.
Uh, IFF in the past has also been, uh,
aimed at large scale projects.
And your average council hasn't got sufficient scale in
those projects to make the benefits actually, or, or dead
Headroom. Yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
Um, well, no, the IFF is is an answer to removing some of
that debt headroom, but there costs associated with it.
But to get the payback, you need large scale projects.
You need a hundred million dollars plus projects.
You can't do an IFF on a $5 million small CapEx project.
And when you go through the councils
and aggregate, sure it comes up large,
but it's the Auckland, it's the Hamiltons, the Ong
as it's ton cities.
The other, the other 60 councils don't have enough
projects of size.
Sorry, one final question.
Um, the waters entities
that have been set up under local water done well, do,
do you see a role partnering alongside them as well?
'cause I'm assuming they're gonna be leveraging
the heck outta this opportunity.
Yeah. But the RES is intended to be able
to provide the same products to water entities
as it would to local authorities.
Yeah. Thank you.
Chair. Yes. Julian
Cheto. I, I just, it
sounds a lot of work has been done on the Raz,
but, um, do we have any idea of like, timeframe for,
'cause it, it says, say if legislation is
enacted to establish it.
So that makes it sound like it's pretty far away. Like,
Um, so we are advocating now for legislation, uh,
and we'd love to have confirmation.
We believe we could have it stood up in 12 to 18 months.
Um, and I guess we're just, at the moment, uh,
we've briefed the minister
provided a business case to the minister.
Uh, and obviously we're looking
for confirmation as soon as possible,
But like a legislative process of four,
one can be 12 to 18 months.
The, um, obviously there's a, a lot of work that needs
to be done to actually establish the, the res itself.
So we think that's a 12 to 18 month timeframe.
The legislation or the, you know, the process
to en enact the legislation could
be done in parallel with that.
Okay. And I guess
because the amendments to the IFF will be happening sooner,
'cause that already exists and potentially we could, yeah,
Yeah. So, so, but
Is it a problem for the RAs if the IFF is doing some
of the same work that No,
What, what we're trying to make sure is that, um,
when RAs is set up,
we can also do IFF levies through the RAs.
I see. Okay. That, that's the intention is to make sure
that it's future proofed so that RA is up and running.
Um, as a rate par, you can put your rates through the RAA
and defer your rates until you sell your house.
Mm-hmm. Uh, you can, uh, put a solar, uh,
installation on your roof and have it,
and, and be repaired over time.
But also to make sure that if the IFF levies do go through
that they're eligible for deferral under the Raz product,
that's what we for.
And would people, I I, sorry, this is completely
separate question, but like, um, for really small councils
that don't have any money, like Chatham Islands for example,
would they be able to, would people there be able
to access it or No,
Provided the council supports it,
The, uh, the council will need to, to join as a member
and to become a member.
Um, there's a, a few things that the council needs to do.
They need to, um, provide information, um, so
that we can access the, the rate payers.
Um, we need an agreement around originating loans,
so providing access to the Raz to yeah,
actually write the loans in the first place.
Um, and, um, sorry,
the third thing is just right moment, oh, sorry.
They need to sign up to a Georgia in civil guarantee.
So with the LGFA, the, uh, uh,
when council's borrowed from the LGFA, they sign up
to Georgia and civil guarantee it would be the same sort
of Georgia and civil guarantee that, uh,
local author sign up.
So their rate payers can access it.
Thanks. Okay.
The, um, expend extending the eligibility, uh, to
new water organizations, Kiwi Rail, NZTA
with your, um, for levies.
With, with your mantra being helping rate payers upfront
with cost of living and, um, charges from council.
If we are leveling, um, enabling the levying
of Crown entities, for example, um, uh, what's your view on
that and what does it mean for, uh, the rate payers
of New Zealand potentially?
I think that would be a, a a little bit
of a step away from what the RES is currently doing.
The RES has been set up by local authorities
for local authorities.
So, um, part of
that is the local author is providing a jointed several
guarantee, um, local authorities,
jointed severally guaranteeing, um, government agencies is,
is, hasn't been contemplated at the moment, um,
but it still is applicable to a, you know, a sizable portion
of what IFF is intended to do,
which is support local authorities.
Okay. Okay. Well, as, um, Mr.
Hamilton's invited you to do, if you've got any
legislative changes, then that's part of our, um,
select committee processes.
We invite submitters
to have their say in put up their, um, suggestions.
So, you know, we, if you can get work through Liam
with any papers
that you might wanna submit a supplementary advice thing,
we are very welcome, very open to that.
Uh, we know, um, that the minister
and officials want, want to get this right.
And hence, we had a 10 week submission period.
So, um, we need, you know, all the help we can get
and all the advice we can hear. So thank you.
Very good. Thank you. Thank you.
Okay. Who have we got line now? We now, oh, Dr.
McCluskey, uh, Dr. Nathan McCluskey.
You just need to unmute apparently, if
that's a, if that's English.
Mm.
Okay. Can you hear me now? Yes, we can. Dr.
McCloskey, thank you. Thank you for your patience.
Um, you've got, uh, 10 minutes. Go for it.
Great. Thank you. Uh, grateful for this opportunity to,
to speak to, um, the sleep committee today.
And, uh, apologies for the technical difficulties earlier.
Look there. Um, I guess the purpose
of the, um, the, um,
the purpose of this piece of, um, legislation, the IFF, the,
um, infrastructure funding the finance bill, really is
to ensure, I guess superficially it's to ensure
that the funding of water infrastructure in New Zealand, uh,
can take place, uh, now and into the future.
Uh, but really, uh, when I look at the bill, uh,
we've concluded that, that its objective really is to
shift a, a public resource into private hands.
And this bill makes that possible.
So effectively, what can happen now is that,
um, in independent companies will be able to,
uh, provide the infrastructure that
the government has been responsible for.
Because let's be clear, water
is a fundamental human right.
The access to clean drinking water is a responsibility
that government has, uh, to its constituents.
And what this will do is it will enable, uh, a lot more
of what we're seeing in Wellington
with the Veolia situation.
And, uh, the, um,
I guess the debacle with water
and it's causing to Wellington's coast.
Uh, we, we believe
that government should be providing that this piece of, um,
legislation is effectively, uh, by creating SPVs.
And it doesn't specify whether the public
or private, so they, they could easily be private, uh, then
with the profit that could be gained from
providing water provision of, of water accrues
to indi individual private companies.
But if the infrastructure, uh, falls over
as we're seeing spectacularly in Wellington,
in the liability or the levies, uh,
can be then put on future water provision.
In other words, the public then, then becomes responsible
for, for paying for that.
Now, we know, uh, from, for example, in the uk, PFIs the,
um, private financing initiatives make it clear that
it's two to 5% more expensive to provide these things
through private sector than public borrowing.
And so, uh, we are really concerned about that shift
of responsibility away from the public to the private sector
who, who ultimately aren't accountable
because they're not accountable to the people,
only to their shareholders.
And, and they can pull out of agreements, um, in a way
that public sector can't.
And that's why it's safer,
we believe, with the public sector.
And we think that, that, um, you know,
what we've seen in the uk, for example, is a good example
is, is by, is, is costs that are as much as double
what they would have been had the borrowing
been through the public sector.
And there's plenty of research on that
that we can provide if you are interested.
Uh, so we think that,
and you're probably looking for alternative ways to pay
for this, because these are big bills.
Um, and there was some legislation in place,
impact assessments were done around that, um, in relation
to three waters, for example.
And, and local water done well is the replacement for that.
But we feel that this is, is not a good replacement for that
because of the shift of liability to levies,
which can be levied on that future water against the public.
And even in some cases, um, Maori land, for example.
Now, what we are concerned about is, is that the,
the liability then leaves, uh, the public sector with, with,
uh, public accountability and,
and resides then in the private sector,
but that ultimately it will come back
to the public sector if that falls over.
And, and so we, uh, we are speaking against this bill.
We're in a, we're in opposition to it.
We think there are other ways to,
to help fund this infrastructure.
For example, there are lots of contributors
to the water system, not just drinking water,
but say storm water, for example.
The roads contribute a lot to that.
Um, yeah, all, all of it.
And so, but,
but road user charges are not levied, uh,
against the water, the stormwater that's created
as a result of their construction.
And we'd like to see that to happen, uh, happen as a, as,
uh, an alternative, for example.
But, uh, bottom line is that, you know, history offers kind
of cautionary examples of what happens when,
when water is privatized,
which this bill was really designed
to do through the SPV system.
Uh, and the impact assessment
we think was done in 2019 is pretty accurate.
And we would like those, uh, concerns to be taken on board.
Um, and,
and that's, that's really, um, the thing
that we wanted to focus on.
Most of all of the aspects we want to focus on.
You've read the submission, uh,
we're happy to answer questions.
Okay. Thank, thank you.
I'm gonna go to Dr. Deborah Russell.
Uh, just a, a straightforward one.
It's the first time I've come across, sorry, new Zealanders
for a democratic economy.
Can you just explain a little about, about who you are
and what your purposes are?
Yeah, absolutely. So New Zealanders
for a democratic economy was established in order to, uh,
create public awareness around, uh, an alternative
to the capital finance system.
Uh, because, uh, we believe that the, the market is, uh,
a good servant, but a very poor master.
And what we are seeing is that, uh, New Zealand government,
uh, local, regional, and,
and national, uh, moving away from responsibility to provide
fundamental, uh, resources which are necessary,
they're fundamental human rights like water, and,
and shifting the responsibility of
that to the private sector.
When the private sector will, as we've seen in Wellington
with Veolia, for example, is asked to accept responsibility
for the failures in that, then they,
they're not held accountable
and they can't be held accountable by the public.
They're accountable, really only shareholders.
And, and so what, what New Zealanders
for Democratic economy is saying is that we want
to see, uh, our economy be publicly accountable.
Our economy should be answerable to the people.
Um, not private companies.
Private companies aren't, uh, elected by government.
Governments are elected by the public.
And so the public should be, should have the risk,
should have oversight,
democratic oversight, and hold them accountable.
Thank you. Okay. Thank you.
I just, I just wonder, wonder about
how many people are involved in your organization,
like actively involved,
Um, talking about 200 members. About 200,
Right. Thank you.
There we go. Okay. Thank you, uh, Dr.
McCluskey for your presentation
and, uh, appearing before us today.
Thank you. Appreciate
That. Okay.
Transit Next Limited, uh, Ryan Ferguson
and, uh, Steve Kelly. Oh, welcome.
Welcome. Steve will be, uh, coming in from Melbourne.
He's actually my funder.
And, um, he's the next property developer.
Uh, he's gone from being a developer to being a funder.
Uh, and he works on a global situation.
Um, I have a partnership with a company called China Rail.
Um, it's a transport infrastructure
and brought a couple models along
'cause people don't really understand what I'm trying to do.
You know, you can pass that around.
Uh, it's trackless tram, it runs on the roads.
Uh, it's the opposition to
Light rail, trackless tram.
Yeah. Would love, it's one
and 20th of light rail.
It can be installed in months.
It's run on hydrogen or electricity.
And the superconductor was developed by Victoria. This
Okay. Just,
um, yeah. Um,
I, I'll go through,
We'll get you started and I'm just gonna have
to be very, um, tight on time. Yep.
No, I understand that. Um, just, so I just wanted
to preempt that so I didn't cut you short.
You could tailor make this, um,
so we can get to the house on time.
So it's our fault, not yours, but welcome.
No, it's not a problem. Let's just do the deal.
Um, get on with it.
Well, I just wanted, um, I, I support the submission.
I think it's great. Um, I did a PhD
proposal looking at alternative to ways of funding
and financing infrastructure.
And I looked down the supply chain, not the demand.
So no rates, no taxes, that sort of thing.
I went to the assets that local government
and central government own.
Um, it's quite funny.
We're sitting in this building in 1992.
I actually had this building under contract with this,
and it was putting it into a fund from the us.
So, you know, we have a lot of value in our books now,
but we're not recognizing it.
And that just comes back from poor asset management.
And asset management is about asset registry.
You know, I'm a, I actually was the head of Knight Frank
and a number of valuation companies,
and that was my specialty, corporate real estate.
And I just see the crown throwing
so much money down the drain.
You once owned 40 buildings in New Zealand,
you own very little now.
And those buildings are actually like, um, dams.
Dams hold water, water producers.
Um, your leases are gold, but you give them away.
And the example is 55, uh, Molesworth Street.
I know that developer personally,
I actually had him under contract on a piece
of land in Auckland of 175 mil.
He told me all about that deal.
Um, he's walking away with 75 to 80 million.
He's already pre-sold the building on the
government signing the lease.
Are you talking about the MFA bill? Yep. Okay.
So this is your problem. You're giving too much away.
I support the bill in a number of areas.
'cause it's great for housing. Um, one of the problems
with housing, one of the problems with the
original financing of this bill is just too complex.
So it's too large.
So you were actually only focusing on,
say, the larger companies.
We don't have them here. Um, 90% of our, uh, development
for housing is done by one or probably up to 10 people.
And they usually houses from 10 up to 50. Okay.
So your idea is good,
but you're going the wrong way about it.
Am all right. Um, with water, I'm worried.
Uh, the issue there is you're creating fess.
I've dealt with a lot of, you know, getting this through.
Councils in Auckland at just killed me. All right.
They did a lot of stupid thing
and thanks Dan for being there.
Um, WI lost $300,000 getting this.
It was, they were all into light rail.
They set me up to fail.
Um, I would go to meetings with two of our people
with 20 on there on the other side.
I was getting stupid things like letters saying there was
no, uh, slave labor in building these from China Rail.
Now you gotta realize China Rail's, $60 billion company.
Um, it's a world leader.
Uh, the ex pre the ex-chairman, um,
the ex CEO is actually President Xi.
So it's got huge power. And they love New Zealand.
They have supplied 80 to 2000 rolling stock to Kiwi rail,
all built in Dunedin.
Okay. So they're very keen. I Queenstown.
We're heading off the, I've got a team coming in from China.
I've pushed them back so many months.
'cause as soon as they see Queenstown,
they were here in a week.
And these are the top executives.
This is, they have 130,000 people.
It's a global, and they were on the plane ready to come.
I was going Slow down guys, slow down.
I want to roll this out.
And because it's infrastructure, um, adds a lot of value.
Um, the cost is very cheap compared to like rail.
It's ideal for Queenstown, um, Christchurch,
Wellington and Auckland.
Uh, it ta it's regenerate cities.
So it's really reason why I got involved in,
it's really a real estate deal.
You build houses outta this. It's, it's a niche.
You'll see it in my submission.
Um, other issues apart from that, it's quite good.
And don't know Steve's online, 'cause he's a funder
and I asked him the other day,
and Steve's actually prepared to put some money up.
We buy one or two of these, bring it into the country.
Um, NZTA been brilliant to deal with.
Um, I really think, you know,
we should have the old ministry of works
to do a lot of infrastructure.
If you did, um, you'd go down to the NZTA model.
Um, basically we just, it's certified for Australia.
Um, the only issue they had in Australia was
they didn't have, they had red lights at one end
and white lights yet to have both.
'cause it's dual driven. Um, all right.
That's about the end of my, okay.
Have we and Steve's online now? Steve,
Have you got anything to add?
Um, yeah, it's very interesting listening
to these submissions and, um, very nice
to see public getting involved.
Thank you very much. Um, with regard to funding, uh,
these kind of projects, we can create a, a,
a hybrid private bond government, um,
situation where the PRMs could be funded over a 20 year
period based on the back of a bond in joint venture
with an equity fund and the asset owner.
So we are looking to create something that is sustainable,
yet not out of the cost, uh, excess cost
that does come onto these new projects.
And I think the way Brian has put it together
with this product, there is definitely,
I can definitely see a need just from the airport
to Auckland City for a product like this.
Like this or a tram like this takes over three
or four buses mm-hmm.
And is fast and electronic
and all the things we want to do in the modern world.
Yeah. And as you can see, um, from the
infrastructure commissions, um, uh, 30 year plan, we've got,
uh, $275 billion worth of projects, 11
and a half thousand that we now need to, um,
prioritize as best we can.
Yeah, yeah. Um, so yeah. Okay.
So, but overall you are, um,
you are saying this legislation's an improvement from the
2020 version.
It'll make developments easier. The innovation, it's got it.
Tools for funding will be helpful.
It's the tools are there that are good,
but you gotta get out and communicate to developers.
Developers are small, small numbers.
They don't like dealing with councils
'cause they're all being burn under the RMA.
Right. I know it's been reformed and it's great,
but the r remains nicknamed in the property game is the
anti-Development Act.
All right. And you've gotta get out there a lot
of good monies coming into New Zealand,
but I'd like to actually see money from KiwiSaver.
I would like to run this with a bond, uh, a lease over the,
over the road and at lease to A PPP, which I've spoken
to the National Infrastructure Fund,
we had China rail with it.
They won't fund a trial. They will fund a rollout.
Um, and the way we would do it is create a bond.
These things last for 30 years.
Um, so basically they're a lot cheaper. They take off.
Uh, one of that would take five buses
off the road straight away.
Okay. And also they can be run autonomous, so you can
actually have a control center. So yeah.
Okay. We'll leave it that,
we'll leave at that, but thank you.
Is that it? Thank you for the, you've got your, um,
trackless trams back.
Yeah, I've got 'em all. No other questions?
No, we'll leave it at that. Really interesting. Thank you.
Thank you. Okay. We've got a couple of short ones. Yes.
Appreciate your help in person. Okay. Richard Mead.
Richard, thank you.
Sorry my friend. Alright.
Yeah, there you go.
Okay, Richard, thanks for your patience.
Sorry we are short on time, but thank you.
No worries. Um, yeah, well I'm not part
of any of these large organizations.
I've come here as one of your, uh, rate payers today.
Um, granted I've worked in a huge number of, uh,
organizations over the years
and just about every sector that'll be in
well involved with this bill.
Um, so I am
here in, well, I'm here to oppose the bill.
Um, I think it's a, a pathway down towards, uh,
closer to hedgemon domination slash um, debt colonialism,
which I don't want to be involved in.
Um, so I think if the bill
was passed, um, as intended,
it would create a large cost on the taxpayer.
Um, it'll achieve faster growth in local infrastructure,
but it technically, it hands a blank check to local councils
who can build, uh, an item with debt
and then choose who to levy for it.
And that levy will be essentially the rate
payers and the taxpayers.
Um, so on one hand you propose to cap rate hikes
for years, uh, in a few years time in 2029, which kind
of guarantees that we're gonna have larger rate hikes in the
next few years as they get ready for that.
But on the other hand, you then set up organizations under
the councils that get to levy the local populace, um,
and they do that.
Um, Yeah, I've gotta paraphrase a little bit of this,
but I'm not a fan of extra levies on the local population.
I think there's a better way to do it.
So I've come here with a few suggestions,
but let me just be clear.
I think this bill will explode debt
and borrowing for core public services
that have already been
provided for under the general government.
Um, and I could elaborate a long way,
but I won't, what I will do is suggest an alternative.
Okay. I think
that this bill should essentially be scrapped on its face
and I think you should move towards reforming the
state owned enterprises act.
Instead, I think you should give
the state owned enterprises another shot,
and I think you should do it in a way
that will not end this in
hyperinflation or anything like that.
Um, Yes, it's a bit
of a different, um, approach.
So I think
that the Reserve Bank should fund the capital
assets on its face.
I think they should put them in a capital debt.
I think they should hold that debt
as a non-interest accruing debt.
And then I think you guys, I think the organizations
or the state owned enterprise,
or in this case the provincial owned enterprises instead
of state owned, should then, um, be run
as for-profit organizations.
And those for-profit organizations should repay the debt.
And once they're finished repaying the debt,
they should put all of their profits towards the local
council that owns them.
Okay. Okay. Yep.
Now, yes, I know that's, that's, that's your al alternative.
Um, but just come back to your immediate opposition
to the bill and then we'll open up for questions.
Then we'll have to move on. Yes.
Um, so if, if you were to sum up your opposition
to the bill, it's on what basis?
It's on the debt burden.
It'll cause the rate pays through the levies. Yeah.
Okay. Pretty clear. Okay. That's pretty clear.
Any questions? No, thank you Richard, for coming in.
Appreciate it. Okay.
Uh, that takes us to the last one, John McDonald. Uh, worry.
Yeah. Would security check for me?
I don't think they have, but could I give it to
And welcome miles?
Mm-hmm. Oh, John, sorry we've squeezed you at the end.
Not sure if it's, um, but we're in, we're in your hands.
So let's go If you can give us, um, a little bit of time
for opportunity for questions,
but we haven't got much time, so thank you. Yeah.
Alright, Kiara.
Um, so to sum up, my main con concerns with this bill
and the IFF Act in general
is it's creating liability through proximity to stupidity.
So by virtue of just your proximity
to an unwise development, um,
you are potentially becoming liable for both the levy
and the debts associated with that levy.
So you can argue this is the case with local government.
Generally you've got stupid and extravagant spending.
You can argue we need the infrastructure,
but often it's costing many multiples times
more than it needs to.
And then you've got stupidly large debts being used
to pay for that infrastructure.
And I think there's a relationship between the two.
We're loading things up on intergenerational debt rather
than having, um, year to year budgetary discipline.
What makes this different and to local government generally,
and this also ties in with the water reforms,
is we've got potentially two layers of separation here
between democratic accountability
and easy to see council box.
So we've potentially got these SPV arrangements
as one level going through a water CCO
and going through council.
So the ability for, um, local voters to keep track of this
and elected representatives is gonna be tricky.
Um, and we're gonna get more off box borrowing, um,
which causes concern.
Um, so the kind of scenario that I
would've concerns about is you've got two neighboring farms
or lifestyle blocks.
One of the, um, both of them self-contained, not hooked up
to water supply or sewage.
One of the farms
or lifestyle blocks decides to
be developed into a subdivision.
They get involved in these s PVS
executive decree from order
and council declares a larger region to be, um,
liable for the levy and the debt.
They spend up large putting an infrastructure
and then that developer goes bankrupt.
Does the neighboring property that decided
that getting involved in that development was unwise
and didn't sign up for in any way, did they become liable
for the levy just by being a neighbor to the developer
that's gone bust and you've got these fire sale pro
provisions accelerated process for selling land
to cover the debts.
Will the neighbor who had nothing to do
with this development, didn't want the infrastructure,
didn't need the infrastructure,
was just mining their own business?
Do they suddenly become vulnerable to a fire sale
to cover the SPV debts
that this dodgy developer has racked up?
Um, so most of
what I've sent in is about fundamental rights
that people have, um, regarding, um, their property
and protection from unreasonable seizure of their property
and also their right to a fair
and public hearing by a competent, independent,
and impartial tribunal.
Um, and that's under Article 14
of the International Covenant of Civil and Political Rights.
So basically I see this bill as a trade off
that you're trying to make between fundamental rights
to people having their day in court, um,
to, um
Mm-hmm. Okay.
Indicate those rights. Yeah,
We'll just have to, we might just
have to leave it there, John.
Um, and you post some very interesting questions,
Returns on capital provided to holders or debts of equity.
Okay. So are you gonna be putting the people
who have invested in the PV above the rights
of neighboring landowners to just Yep.
Piece of No. Those, those liability questions are really
good questions and, uh,
that they'll probably come up in the departmental report
when we, um, uh, start working through any amendments
to the amendment bill.
So thank you for your presentation
and raising those points today, John, and, and coming in
before us, uh, via Zoom.
Okay. Members that finishes the infrastructure funding
and financing amendment bill hearings, uh, we're off
to the house.